--- Lesson 1: Who held global power in 1450? ---
QUESTION: Based on Source C, how does the reality of the Thirteen Factories in Canton challenge the idea that Europeans dominated global trade in the 1700s?
TEXT SOURCE: <div class='scaffold-box'><strong>Source E: An Eye...
TEXT SOURCE:   <i style="font-size:0.9em; color:#64748b;"><stro...
QUESTION: Study Source G. How does this visual source support the idea that everyday life for a peasant was a brutal struggle?
--- Lesson 2: How did religious conflict trigger global exploration (1517–1588)? ---
TEXT SOURCE: <blockquote><strong>Source H: An Excerpt from Quee...
QUESTION: How does the author’s perspective in Source H differ from Source G regarding Francis Drake's motives?
QUESTION: Why does Elizabeth refer to the Spanish Armada as 'enemies of my God' in Source G?
QUESTION: How useful is Source H to a historian studying Spanish attitudes toward English exploration in the 16th century?
TEXT SOURCE:   <i style="font-size:0.9em; color:#64748b;"><stro...
QUESTION: Study Source I. Based on this visual evidence, what physical impact did scurvy have on the human body?
--- Lesson 3: Trade or takeover: How did early encounters turn into empire? ---
TEXT SOURCE: <blockquote><strong>Source E: From the First Chart...
QUESTION: What was the primary motivation stated in Source D for colonizing Virginia, and why might the Virginia Company emphasize religious duty over profit?
QUESTION: Using Source E, explain why the East India Company was forced to act politely toward Mughal rulers in 1616, whereas English settlers in Virginia acted aggressively toward Native Americans.
TEXT SOURCE:   <i style="font-size:0.9em; color:#64748b;"><stro...
QUESTION: Study Source F. What does this watercolor tell us about how the Algonquian Powhatan organized their agriculture?
--- Lesson 4: Who controlled Britain: The King, Parliament, or Imperial Profits? ---
IMG SOURCE:  - The East Offering its Riches to Britannia (1778) (undefined)
TEXT SOURCE: Work like a professional historian. Examine these ...
QUESTION: How does Source E reveal a completely different reason for Parliament’s victory over the King compared to the official reason given in Source D?
QUESTION: Look at Source F. What does Cromwell accuse MPs of becoming? Why is this ironic given that merchant wealth helped bring Cromwell to power?
QUESTION: How reliable is Source D as an objective record of Charles I’s reign?
TEXT SOURCE:   <i style="font-size:0.9em; color:#64748b;"><stro...
QUESTION: Study Source E. Based on the title page of this pamphlet, what was the primary goal of the Diggers?
--- Lesson 5: What were the mechanics of the Transatlantic Slave Trade? ---
QUESTION: Study Source A. What does the heavy fortification of Cape Coast Castle tell us about the nature of the slave trade?
QUESTION: Study Source B. Why do you think absentee landlords back in London were able to ignore the brutality shown in illustrations like this?
--- Lesson 6: How did enslaved Africans resist the Transatlantic Slave Trade? ---
TEXT SOURCE: To truly understand the experience of the Transatl...
QUESTION: Inferring Motive (Source E): Why did jumping overboard represent a powerful act of resistance for enslaved Africans, even though it resulted in death?
QUESTION: Cross-Referencing Utility: How does Source G confirm that "day-to-day" resistance was real and effective, even when reported by a hostile white overseer?
QUESTION: Evaluating Significance (Source D): Why was Equiano’s autobiography so historically revolutionary when published in London in 1789?
QUESTION: Study Source D. How does learning about individuals like Harriet Tubman challenge traditional historical narratives of the slave trade?
QUESTION: Study Source E. How does this botanical illustration help explain the secret power held by Obeah healers?
QUESTION: Study Source E. Why is it problematic to only teach about men like Wilberforce when studying the end of slavery?
--- Lesson 7: How 'modern' was Britain by 1750? (Synthesis & Assessment) ---
QUESTION: Study Source A. How does this painting glorify the British Empire while masking the brutal realities of colonization?
TEXT SOURCE: Analyze these two contrasting contemporary account...
QUESTION: Reconciling Contradictions: How can Source G and Source F offer completely opposite views of Britain in the late 1740s/1750s without either author necessarily lying?
QUESTION: Analyzing Audience & Purpose: Why would Henry Fielding (Source F), a London magistrate, exaggerate the chaos and crime in London in 1751?
QUESTION: Synthesis Challenge: Combine the insights from Sources D and E with your knowledge of the Atlantic Slave Trade to write a nuanced 3-sentence summary of British society in 1750.
TEXT SOURCE:   <i style="font-size:0.9em; color:#64748b;"><stro...
QUESTION: Study Source H. How does this image of Mudlarks contrast with the idea of London being a wealthy, modern capital?