1 (a). Describe one feature of aseptic surgery in the early 20th century. (2 marks)
1 (b). Describe one feature of early x-ray machines. (2 marks)
1 (a). Describe one feature of the support trench system on the Western Front. (2 marks)
1 (b). Describe one feature of the problems involved in transporting wounded soldiers away from the battleground. (2 marks)
Source A: From the recorded memories of William Easton, East Anglian Field Ambulance. He was eighteen years old in 1916. Here he describes conditions near Ypres in 1917. "Up at Ypres we used to go up the line and we'd be waist deep in mud. We were carrying the wounded down near a place called Hooge, where had been a terrible amount of fighting. One trip down a trench in those conditions and you would be all in — exhausted. If you got two or three wounded men down in a day, that was all you could expect to do. We had to carry men in fours there and we had to be very careful because you could do more damage to a man than the shell if you jolted him too much or he fell off the stretcher. To make carrying easier we had slings which we put round our shoulders and over the stretcher's handles."
Source B: A photograph of a wagon belonging to the Field Ambulance service, in use in the Somme region, September 1916.
2 (a). How useful are Sources A and B for an enquiry into the impact of the terrain on the transport of the wounded on the Western Front? Explain your answer, using Sources A and B and your knowledge of the historical context. (8 marks)
2 (b). How could you follow up Source A to find out more about the impact of the terrain on the transport of the wounded on the Western Front? In your answer, you must give the question you would ask and the type of source you could use. (4 marks)
1 (a). Describe one feature of trench foot on the Western Front. (2 marks)
1 (b). Describe one feature of gas attacks on the Western Front. (2 marks)
Source A: From the notebook of Lance Sergeant Elmer Cotton, who served in the 5th Northumberland Fusiliers in 1915. He is describing the effects of a chlorine gas attack. "It produces a flooding of the lungs. It is the equivalent to drowning, only on dry land. The effects are these — a splitting headache and a terrific thirst (but to drink water is instant death), a knife-edge pain in the lungs and the coughing up of a greenish froth off the stomach and the lungs, finally resulting in death. It is a fiendish death to die."
Source B: From an account by an anonymous soldier serving on the Western Front. "When we got to the ambulances, we heard about a recent gas attack. A huge, greenish cloud of smoke with a yellowish top had rolled down from the German trenches. Only sixty men out of a thousand survived the attack... One man’s face was dark blue and with every cough, he coughed up a thick stream of discoloured phlegm. He was too busy struggling to breathe to bother much about anything else – a most horrible form of death."
2 (a). How useful are Sources A and B for an enquiry into the effects of poison gas attacks on soldiers on the Western Front? Explain your answer, using Sources A and B and your knowledge of the historical context. (8 marks)
2 (b). How could you follow up Source A to find out more about the effects of poison gas attacks on soldiers on the Western Front? In your answer, you must give the question you would ask and the type of source you could use. (4 marks)
1 (a). Describe one feature of the work of the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry (FANY). (2 marks)
1 (b). Describe one feature of the Casualty Clearing Stations (CCS). (2 marks)
Source A: From Pat Beauchamp’s autobiography, Fanny Goes to War, published in 1919. Beauchamp worked as an ambulance driver from 1916. Here she describes driving casualties. "The ambulances were then reversed right up to the doors, and the stretcher bearers soon filled them up with four lying cases... Those journeys back were perfect nightmares. Try as one would, it was impossible not to bump a certain amount over those appalling roads full of holes and cobbles. It was pathetic when a voice from the interior could be heard asking, “Is it much farther, Sister?” and knowing how far it was, my heart ached for them."
Source B: A photograph of a horse-drawn wagon belonging to the Field Ambulance service, in use in the Somme region, September 1916.
2 (a). How useful are Sources A and B for an enquiry into the problems of transporting the wounded on the Western Front? Explain your answer, using Sources A and B and your knowledge of the historical context. (8 marks)
2 (b). How could you follow up Source A to find out more about the problems of transporting the wounded on the Western Front? In your answer, you must give the question you would ask and the type of source you could use. (4 marks)
1 (a). Describe one feature of the Thomas splint on the Western Front. (2 marks)
1 (b). Describe one feature of the use of blood transfusions on the Western Front. (2 marks)
Source A: An extract from an article published in a medical journal in 2019, describing the use and impact of the Carrel-Dakin method for treating wounds during the First World War. "The Carrel-Dakin technique was a major breakthrough for fighting infection. During the Battle of Champagne in 1915, 80% of the wounded were infected with gas gangrene bacteria. A year later, when surgeons applied the Carrel-Dakin technique during the Battle of the Somme, that number was 20%."
Source B: A photograph taken in 1917 showing a mobile x-ray unit attached to a van, being used in a tent at a British Casualty Clearing Station.
2 (a). How useful are Sources A and B for an enquiry into new medical techniques being used on the Western Front to deal with injuries? Explain your answer, using Sources A and B and your knowledge of the historical context. (8 marks)
2 (b). How could you follow up Source A to find out more about new medical techniques being used on the Western Front to deal with injuries? In your answer, you must give the question you would ask and the type of source you could use. (4 marks)
* Source A: A photograph taken in a London hospital in 1905, showing a surgeon operating while wearing a sterilised gown and rubber gloves.
* Source B: An extract from a medical journal published in 1912. It states: "Thanks to Landsteiner's discovery of blood groups, we no longer face the danger of the body rejecting the transfusion. However, because the blood coagulates almost immediately upon leaving the body, we must connect the donor directly to the patient's vein."
* Q1 (a). Describe one feature of aseptic surgery in the early twentieth century. (2 marks)
Q1 (b). Describe one feature of early X-ray machines in the early twentieth century. (2 marks)
Q2 (a). How useful are Sources A and B for an enquiry into the progress and limitations of medical treatments before the First World War? Explain your answer, using Sources A and B and your knowledge of the historical context. (8 marks)
Q2 (b). How could you follow up Source B to find out more about the problems of blood transfusions? In your answer, you must give the question you would ask and the type of source you could use. Complete the table below. (4 marks)
* Source A: A diary entry from an RAMC officer at the Somme, 1916: "The terrain is devastated. We cannot use the motor ambulances as the heavy rains and artillery have turned the roads into deep quagmires of mud. We are forced to use six horses to pull a single wagon."
* Source B: A photograph taken in 1917 showing four stretcher-bearers struggling to carry a wounded man through knee-deep mud and shell craters.
* Q1 (a). Describe one feature of the support trench system on the Western Front. (2 marks)
Q1 (b). Describe one feature of the problems involved in transporting wounded soldiers away from the battleground. (2 marks)
Q2 (a). How useful are Sources A and B for an enquiry into the problems involved in transporting wounded soldiers away from the battleground? Explain your answer, using Sources A and B and your knowledge of the historical context. (8 marks)
Q2 (b). How could you follow up Source A to find out more about the work of the stretcher bearers on the Western Front? In your answer, you must give the question you would ask and the type of source you could use. Complete the table below. (4 marks)
* Source A: A report from a Medical Officer in 1915: "Altogether about 200 men had to be evacuated from our section of the trenches with swollen, numb feet due to the freezing mud. Several require amputation."
* Source B: A diary entry from an RAMC surgeon: "The men are brought in with horrific shrapnel injuries. The metal drives the filthy, manured soil deep into the muscle, creating an environment where gas gangrene thrives. We often have to amputate to save their lives."
* Q1 (a). Describe one feature of poison gas attacks on the Western Front. (2 marks)
Q1 (b). Describe one feature of the fighting on the Western Front that led to a high number of injuries. (2 marks)
Q2 (a). How useful are Sources A and B for an enquiry into the problem of ill health arising from the trench environment? Explain your answer, using Sources A and B and your knowledge of the historical context. (8 marks)
Q2 (b). How could you follow up Source A to find out more about the problem of trench foot? In your answer, you must give the question you would ask and the type of source you could use. Complete the table below. (4 marks)
* Source A: A letter from an RAMC nurse working at a Casualty Clearing Station (CCS) in 1916: "We worked night after night, in the thunderous noise of raging battles. The surgeons are constantly amputating limbs to stop the spread of gangrene before putting the men on the trains."
* Source B: A diary entry from a member of the FANY in 1917: "I drove my motor ambulance through the terrible mud for 14 hours straight today, bringing men from the Main Dressing Station down to the railhead."
* Q1 (a). Describe one feature of the underground hospital at Arras. (2 marks)
Q1 (b). Describe one feature of the work of the FANY on the Western Front. (2 marks)
Q2 (a). How useful are Sources A and B for an enquiry into the work of medical staff in the Casualty Clearing Stations (CCS) on the Western Front? Explain your answer, using Sources A and B and your knowledge of the historical context. (8 marks)
Q2 (b). How could you follow up Source A to find out more about the work of medical staff in the Casualty Clearing Stations? In your answer, you must give the question you would ask and the type of source you could use. Complete the table below. (4 marks)
* Source A: A report from a surgeon at a CCS in 1916: "Several unsuccessful trials this morning to extract a shell fragment from a soldier's brain. Finally, we decided to try using a large wire nail as a magnet."
* Source B: A photograph taken in 1917 showing a wounded soldier resting on a stretcher, with his broken leg held perfectly straight inside a newly issued Thomas Splint.
Q1 (a). Describe one feature of the Thomas Splint. (2 marks)
Q1 (b). Describe one feature of the medical advances in blood transfusions on the Western Front. (2 marks)
Q2 (a). How useful are Sources A and B for an enquiry into new techniques being used on the Western Front to deal with injuries? Explain your answer, using Sources A and B and your knowledge of the historical context. (8 marks)
Q2 (b). How could you follow up Source A to find out more about new techniques being used on the Western Front to deal with injuries? In your answer, you must give the question you would ask and the type of source you could use. Complete the table below. (4 marks)